Once around, Taby's
star. Truly shocking and fascinating
discovery when it was first
announced. Taby's star is just off the
base of Signis. It's near to the star
Denb there at the the tail of the
constellation of Signis, the swan. But
it's a very faint star. It's too faint
really to go tracking down. Magnitude
11.7 is right on the limit for many
amateur telescopes. And actually, all
you'll see is a faintest of dots. But go
ahead if you want to have a go. Now, we
believe it's
1,470 light years away from us. That's
quite a significant distance and
accounts partly for why it's so faint.
It was noted to be of such great
interest as a result of the Kepler space
telescope mission. Kepler telescope was
sent up into orbit to stare at a patch
of sky in that region and to look
for the transits of planets passing in
front of their parent star causing a dip
in the light curve um illustrated at the
top there. And the data was presented as
part of the planet hunters program where
you could join as a citizen
scientist and you would be given lots of
training data and then
given data sets where you would look to
see if you could see in amongst all the
noise and variability of chosen stars
whether or not the light curve was
taking a dip and revealing the presence
of a planet. And I indeed did a lot of
that and uh found a number of hits as a
result.
But the uh Kepler input catalog number
8462852 is Buan star. And this was also
coded as
LGM2 as a homage to
LGM1, the discovery of pulsars by
Joselyn Bell Bernell here in
Cambridge. So let's take a look at what
I will call Taby's star from now on.
Named after Tabitha, who was the person
who promulgated the discovery. It's an
F-type main sequence star. So, nothing
very un uh orthodox, just a little bit
hotter than our sun. And it's a double
star. It has a red dwarf companion
orbiting around it about 900
astronomical units away. An AU the
Earth's sun distance. 30 AU would be the
distance to Neptune. So, this is quite a
long way away. 30 times the distance of
Neptune. And what was particularly
unusual about it was the light curve.
The light curve, of course, was what we
were all looking at trying to find
planets. And you would see the light
curve take a dip of a few percent. The
one that I found had a 3% dip, revealing
the presence of a planet nearly as large
as Saturn orbiting another different
F-type star. And in this case, the there
were some dips larger than that. But the
behavior overall was thoroughly weird.
It had a very irregular pattern to it.
Just didn't seem to repeat. Some of the
uh dips were longer than others. Some
were very narrow. So, something strange
was going on here. Something might be
blocking the light. Now, if it was a
planet, it would look much more like
this. This is an extract from the planet
hunters data.
And the idea is a planet passes in front
of the star and when it does so you get
a dip and you will get one every time of
more or less the same intensity as the
planet goes in front of the star. Now it
may vary a little bit depending on
exactly the path that the planet takes
because you get this phenomenon called
limb darkening around the edge of the
star as shown in the illustration there.
It's less bright than it is in the
center. So if you have your planet pass
directly across the central point of the
star, you'll block part of the bright
disc where if it's only grazes and only
passes the limb that you'll get a less
uh intense drop in the light, but they
should be pretty regularly spaced as the
planet orbits around. Obviously there
are reasons why the planet's orbit might
be perturbed, but they should all also
be pretty narrow. Um, planets are
generally small. So, something very
strange going on with those weird light
drops at Taby's
star. Well, if it wasn't a planet, what
could it have been? Well, we also saw a
lot of traces illustrated schematically
here from eclipsing binaries. a
companion star that you couldn't see but
was orbiting around closely with its uh
companion and passing the line of sight
so that you would have
alternating star A blocking the light
from star B and then half an orbit later
star B blotting out part of the light
from star A. And it's fairly natural
that the two stars are not equal in
brightness. So you would get this strong
weak strong weak strong weak alter
alternating period of um alternating
depth of the half orbital period um of
the uh dips in the light curve. So I saw
a lot of those in Planet Hunters and
labeled them all up as um eclipsing
binaries.
Well, if it's not a planet and it's not
a companion star, how about a dust disc
going
around? Well, that's possible, but it
just didn't seem necessarily quite to
make sense why a disc of dust would have
such irregular
um and uh strange behavior. So, it
remains a possibility, but we're not
entirely sure on that one. It would have
to be very lumpy. Well, if it's not the
dust disc, how about a swarm of comets,
then? That could work. It's if you had a
whole swarm of comets swirling around
the star, maybe the comets and their
tails would create transit events. Uh
but some of them would have to be pretty
big because these transits were blotting
out
light more significant even than um my
planet KIC
9114729B if you're interested which was
this Saturnsized planet round an F type
star that created only a.3% dip. Some of
these dips were bigger, so these would
have to be really quite significantly
large and opaque
things. Another suggestion was a dust
cloud from a giant impact. Maybe there
had been a very large cosmic train wreck
of uh one baby planet smashing into
another one around Tabby star and
creating a huge and irregular cloud of d
uh dust and gas. And that could be just
the right sort of
thing. But the suggestions just keep
coming. How about a planet with
rings such that the main planet and the
body of the rings could intersect the
line of sight and blot out the light
starlight. And depending on exactly the
orientation of the rings and whether the
whole of the ring system was involved in
the transit or not, you would get all
sorts of uh different behavior from
those light curves. So yeah, that might
work.
um a large planet with a whole load of
asteroids following
it would have to be a lot of asteroids.
They would have to be able to blot out
um something significantly similar to
the size of the whole planet, but rather
like the comet hypothesis, you can't
rule this one
out. And then we had the really
interesting suggestions. Maybe this was
the work of an alien
civilization building a large artificial
ring around the star. Maybe
they'd undertaken an immense engineering
project and created a large ring. And
what we were seeing was the shadow of
the ring coming our way as this ring
crossed our line of sight. given that we
didn't really know the orientation of
the equator of the star or how it
rotated is is entirely sort of
plausible, I suppose. Um perhaps they'd
even gone further and the aliens had
built or part built a complete Dyson
sphere encapsulating their star and they
might be trying to completely capture
the energy of the radiation of the star
for their nefarious purposes.
Um entirely possible as a theoretical
idea. I think uh it's extremely uh
difficult to see how you would go about
doing this because the amount of
material that you would need to create
such a mega structure would res require
you to you know take several earth
masses um and completely refine the
whole lot into your materials. It's just
uh extreme
indeed but not impossible I suppose.
Well, maybe there are aliens there. So,
the SETI people turned their artificial
radio source detectors to it. Uh, in
2015, they found nothing. In 2016,
people had a look for optical transients
in case there were um strong beamed
light sources from the aliens and they
didn't find any. And a year later they
tried with lasers trying to detect any
laser emissions that might come our way
and didn't find any. But I just have to
say that absence of evidence is not
evidence of absence. So the fact that we
can't find these things doesn't
necessarily mean that they're not there.
But
2018, Tabby reported that the
observations of her star showed dimming
that was different depending on which
wavelength of light you looked at. So
follow-up observations with a
spectrometer were able to show that the
light from the star was being uh reduced
differently at different wavelengths.
So, this does not suggest a truly solid
object. Um, I suppose it might mean the
Dyson sphere's got windows in it that
are tinted. Um, or you know, those are
all sorts of explanations that you could
go back to, but it's most likely down to
space dust. Um, and the dust blocking
some wavelengths more strongly than
others. So, a fascinating episode how a
a a comparatively simple observation can
lead to all these different possible
explanations, including the fact that it
might just be an alien mega structure.
And so, with that thought, I'll leave
you there. Thanks very much.